---
layout: post
title: "Lean, Mean, Protein Machine"
date: 2016-10-30 13:26:30 -0700
comments: true
categories: [lean protein, muscle, shredded, metabolism, TEF]
---

Everyone knows that if you want to get lean, you need to burn calories. And if you want to burn calories, you need a higher metabolism, ideally a higher resting metabolism. Well, besides employing exercise to increase your metabolism, you can also eat properly to supercharge your resting metabolic rate. Here's how:

Every meal should include the following:

1. Lean protein
2. Fibrous carbs/Fruits
3. Starchy carbs

*Here are a few examples:*

1. Chicken breast (lean protein)
2. Broccoli (fibrous carbs)
3. Brown Rice (starchy carbs)

*OR*

1. Eggs (lean protein)
2. Banana (fruit)
3. Oatmeal (starchy carbs)

*OR*

1. Salmon (lean protein)
2. Asparagus (fibrous carbs)
3. Sweet Potato (starchy carbs)

*OR*

1. Tilapia (lean protein)
2. Spinach (fibrous carbs)
3. Potato (starchy carbs)

The reason is simple, and it boils down to one term you should keep in mind: **[Thermic Effect of Food (TEF)](http://www.ironmanmag.com.au/nutrition/weight-loss/8-burn-calories-while-you-eat-the-thermic-effect-of-food "Thermic Effect of Food")**. This is simply a measure (in % terms) of how much your body works to break down the food. So if you consume something with 100 calories but has 20% TEF, you actually end up consuming only 80 calories. In essence, a calorie is not really a calorie. But we'll get to that in more detail in another post.

Fibrous carbs (like vegetables and fruits) have an extremely high **TEF**. They have around 20% TEF.

What about proteins? As it is the most complex macronutrient and requires so much energy to break down into a usable building block for our body, it has 30% TEF. Boom.

What about starchy carbs? Depending on what you eat, it'll probably be on the lower end (0-5%). So why even eat it? You don't have to - in fact if you're nearing the competition phase, you can completely cut that part out. But for the most part, you'll need energy, and depending on your macronutrient ratio that you have planned, it's probably more feasible to eat starchy carbs to help achieve your desired carb target (unless of course you're okay with eating 10 pounds of spinach).

So if you want to get lean faster, this is one tip you should add to your arsenal. Keep this strategy in mind as you plan and prepare your fat-burning meals.

Happy training!
